Add Ascertainment model for JointAscertainment (#802)
CDCgov/PyRenew: docs/tutorials/ascertainment.qmd

---
title: Joint ascertainment
format:
  gfm:
    code-fold: true
engine: jupyter
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    text_representation:
      extension: .qmd
      format_name: quarto
      format_version: '1.0'
      jupytext_version: 1.19.1
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
    language: python
    name: python3
---

```{python}
# | label: setup
# | output: false
import jax.nn as jnn
import jax.numpy as jnp
import jax.random as random
import numpy as np
import numpyro
import numpyro.distributions as dist
import pandas as pd
import plotnine as p9
import warnings
from plotnine.exceptions import PlotnineWarning
from _tutorial_theme import theme_tutorial

from pyrenew.ascertainment import JointAscertainment
from pyrenew.deterministic import DeterministicPMF
from pyrenew.model import PyrenewBuilder
from pyrenew.observation import NegativeBinomialNoise, PopulationCounts
from pyrenew.randomvariable import DistributionalVariable
from pyrenew.time import MMWR_WEEK

warnings.filterwarnings("ignore", category=PlotnineWarning)
```

Ascertainment is the probability that a latent infection appears in an observed signal, e.g., a hospitalization or visit to the emergency department.

> For hospital admissions this probability is often called an infection-hospitalization ratio (IHR).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For hospital admissions this probability is often called an infection-to-hospitalization rate (IHR).
```

> For emergency department visits it might be called an infection-ED-visit ratio (IEDR).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For emergency department visits it might be called an infection-to-emergency-department rate (IEDR).
```

# | label: independent-observation-processes
hosp_delay_pmf = jnp.array([0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.15, 0.20, 0.15, 0.15, 0.05])
hosp_delay_rv = DeterministicPMF("inf_to_hosp_delay", hosp_delay_pmf)

ed_delay_pmf = jnp.array([0.05, 0.15, 0.30, 0.30, 0.15, 0.05])
ed_delay_rv = DeterministicPMF("inf_to_ed_delay", ed_delay_pmf)

hospital_obs_independent = PopulationCounts(
    name="hospital",
    ascertainment_rate_rv=DistributionalVariable("ihr", dist.Beta(2, 198)),
    delay_distribution_rv=hosp_delay_rv,
    noise=NegativeBinomialNoise(
        DistributionalVariable(
            "hospital_concentration", dist.LogNormal(4.0, 0.5)
        )
    ),
)

ed_obs_independent = PopulationCounts(
    name="ed_visits",
    ascertainment_rate_rv=DistributionalVariable("iedr", dist.Beta(2, 98)),
    delay_distribution_rv=ed_delay_rv,
    noise=NegativeBinomialNoise(
        DistributionalVariable("ed_concentration", dist.LogNormal(4.0, 0.5))
    ),
)
```

```{python}
# | label: independent-prior-draws
n_draws = 1500
key_ihr, key_iedr = random.split(random.PRNGKey(1))

independent_ihr = dist.Beta(2, 198).sample(key_ihr, (n_draws,))
independent_iedr = dist.Beta(2, 98).sample(key_iedr, (n_draws,))

> independent_df = pd.DataFrame(

Reviewer: Add a comment indicating this will be used for visualization later?

Otherwise a bit unclear what it's doing here.

Reviewer 2: moved to where this is being used.

    {
        "hospital_ihr": np.array(independent_ihr),
        "ed_iedr": np.array(independent_iedr),
    }
)
```

## Model-level ascertainment

To share ascertainment structure across count signals, define an ascertainment model once and register it with the builder.
Each observation process receives the appropriate signal-specific accessor from `for_signal()`.

```python

> builder = PyrenewBuilder()

Reviewer: Add an example creation of the object `ascertainment`?

joint_ascertainment = JointAscertainment(
    name="he_ascertainment",
    signals=("hospital", "ed_visits"),
    baseline_rates=jnp.array([0.01, 0.02]),
    scale_tril=jnp.array(
        [
            [0.7, 0.0],
            [0.35, 0.606],
        ]
    ),
)
builder.add_ascertainment(joint_ascertainment)

hospital_obs = PopulationCounts(
    name="hospital",
    ascertainment_rate_rv=joint_ascertainment.for_signal("hospital"),
    delay_distribution_rv=hosp_delay_rv,
    noise=hosp_noise_rv,
    aggregation="weekly",
    reporting_schedule="regular",
    start_dow=MMWR_WEEK,
)
builder.add_observation(hospital_obs)

ed_obs = PopulationCounts(
    name="ed_visits",
    ascertainment_rate_rv=joint_ascertainment.for_signal("ed_visits"),
    delay_distribution_rv=ed_delay_rv,
    noise=ed_noise_rv,
    day_of_week_rv=DeterministicVariable("ed_dow", ed_day_of_week_effects),
)
builder.add_observation(ed_obs)

model = builder.build()
```

Signal names in `for_signal()` must match the names used when the ascertainment model was created.
They do not have to match observation names, but matching them usually makes model code and posterior outputs easier to read.

> When running a model that uses weekly observations or day-of-week effects, pass `obs_start_date` so PyRenew can align the model axis to the calendar.

Reviewer: Not sure we need this line.
```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: removed.

## Summary

- Use ordinary `RandomVariable` objects for independent scalar ascertainment rates.
- Use `JointAscertainment` for correlated scalar rates across signals.

> - Ascertainment and latent infection scale are weakly identified without informative priors or external information.

Reviewer: This is true but we didn't really demonstrate it above. Remove or justify/discuss more above.

Reviewer 2: removed.

    }
)

joint_df = pd.DataFrame(
    {
        "hospital_ihr": np.array(joint_rates[:, 0]),
        "ed_iedr": np.array(joint_rates[:, 1]),
    }
)

compare_df = pd.concat(
    [
        independent_df.assign(prior="Independent scalar priors"),
        joint_df.assign(prior="Joint scalar prior"),
    ],
    ignore_index=True,
)
compare_df["prior"] = pd.Categorical(
    compare_df["prior"],
    categories=["Independent scalar priors", "Joint scalar prior"],
    ordered=True,
)
```

The following plot compares the samples drawn from independent scalar priors and draws from the correlated logit-normal prior used by `JointAscertainment`.
The dashed line marks the prior-center ratio, IEDR = 2 × IHR.

The prior draws from independent priors show that high IHR draws do not imply high IEDR draws.
The joint prior keeps the same approximate scale while inducing positive dependence between the two rates.

```{python}
# | label: plot-joint-priors
# | fig-cap: |
# |   Joint ascertainment induces correlation between scalar signal rates.
# |   The dashed line marks the prior-center ratio, IEDR = 2 × IHR.
# |   The joint prior keeps the same approximate scale while inducing

> # |   positive dependence between the two rates.
> 
> (
>     p9.ggplot(compare_df, p9.aes(x="hospital_ihr", y="ed_iedr"))
>     + p9.geom_point(alpha=0.2, size=1.0, color="steelblue")
>     + p9.geom_abline(intercept=0, slope=2, linetype="dashed", color="gray")
>     + p9.facet_wrap("~prior", nrow=1)
>     + p9.labs(
>         x="Hospital ascertainment rate (IHR)",
>         y="ED ascertainment rate (IEDR)",
>         title="Independent vs. joint scalar ascertainment",
>     )
>     + theme_tutorial
> )

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(
    p9.ggplot(compare_df, p9.aes(x="hospital_ihr", y="ed_iedr"))
    + p9.geom_point(alpha=0.2, size=1.0, color="steelblue")
    + p9.facet_wrap("~prior", nrow=1)
    + p9.labs(
        x="Hospital ascertainment rate (IHR)",
        y="ED ascertainment rate (IEDR)",
        title="Independent vs. joint scalar ascertainment",
    )
    + p9.geom_abline(slope=1, intercept=jnp.log10(2), linetype="dashed", color="gray")
    + p9.scale_y_log10()
    + p9.scale_x_log10()
    + theme_tutorial
)
```

Not totally precise, but this does better job at illustrating the difference

<img width="2000" height="1200" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2649e9cf-9594-47c8-b6ca-3a1e7ca1d8c6" />

Reviewer 3: Original for reference

<img width="2000" height="1200" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/364677d0-a725-45fa-beb4-e69f32831468" />

Reviewer 3: p9 doesn't work automatically with the logit scale transform :(

Author: thanks - good to know!
